# Dostoevsky's leap of faith
#v Orlando Figes reviews Dostoevsky by Joseph Frank

By Orlando Figes12:00AM BST 29 Sep 2002
This is the fifth and eagerly-awaited final volume of a work that began 50 years ago. It is far more than a life of a writer. Joseph Frank positions Fyodor Dostoevsky at the epicentre of a cultural history that spans the 19th century.
He shows how the problems of that culture were articulated in Dostoevsky's works - not on the level in which they ordinarily appeared to his contemporaries, but in terms of the novelist's "eschatological and messianic vision".
No other scholar, in Russia or the West, comes close to Frank's command of the literary, political and philosophical context in which the great Russian writer lived and worked.
It is a warm and intimate portrait of the writer's mental world. Frank explains how minor incidents and episodes from Dostoevsky's life developed into themes and ideas in his art. One such incident was the turning-point of Dostoevsky's life - the dream-like vision of a truly Christian peasant that had come to him in a penal labour camp in Siberia.
Dostoevsky had been exiled there for his participation in a clandestine socialist circle in 1849. But his vision shook him out of the radical materialist beliefs that had led him to despair about the human condition. From the revelation of a single peasant's kindness, he made a leap of faith to the conviction that every Russian peasant harboured Christ's example somewhere in his soul.
Such were the foundations of Dostoevsky's faith. It underpinned his extraordinary brand of messianic Russian nationalism and his critique of the West in the 1870s.
Frank takes up the story of these years, when, following the success of his three great novels in the 1860s (Crime and Punishment, The Idiot and The Devils), Dostoevsky achieved the status of a national prophet in Russia. Many Russian writers have been burdened in this way. In 19th-century Russia, literature became the main arena for religious, political and philosophical debate in the absence of a parliament or a free press. But Dostoevsky revelled in the role of the prophet. Arrogant, and angry with the world in which he lived, he thought he could change it through his art.
Much of his energy was devoted to A Writer's Diary - a regular column which he wrote in the periodical The Citizen from 1873 to the year before his death in 1881. Filled with politics, literary criticism, and pan-Slav diatribes about the virtues of the Russian Empire, the Diary represents a major challenge to the Dostoevsky fan, not least on account of its frequent expressions of anti-Semitism.
Frank's interpretation of the Diary dominates the first half of this last volume. He pulls no punches in his intellectual tussles with the writer's Judaeophobia. He holds his nose in the passages where Dostoevsky lectures on the moral worth of Tsarist rule in Central Asia and the Caucasus. But in the end one gets the sense that even he cannot explain the endless contradictions of a man who could ascend to the spiritual heights of literary creation and yet put his name to such garbage.
In the end Dostoevsky was defined by contradiction. He was torn apart by an inner struggle between love and hate, faith and reason, conviction and doubt. These are the themes of The Brothers Karamazov - Dostoevsky's final masterpiece which dominates the second half of this book. Frank's interpretation is a tour de force, a brilliant and engrossing explanation of the personal, religious and philosophical preoccupations that found their way on to the page.
After the death of his favourite child Aleksei, Dostoevsky felt the need to go in search of faith to the monastery at Optina Pustyn, which became the setting for the early chapters of The Brothers Karamazov. Perhaps more than Frank allows, he also felt compelled to test his faith in a God that allowed the death of innocent children. This became the central discourse of the novel, most famously embodied in the Legend of the Grand Inquisitor: how can we reconcile the existence of suffering with religious faith? And how can we overcome that suffering?
In the novel, Dostoevsky gives all the best lines to the unbelievers - to rationalists like Ivan Karamazov or the Grand Inquisitor, who renounce Christ because they cannot square Him with their reasoned understanding of a better world, which they prefer to reach through humanitarian governance.
To some extent Dostoevsky shared their doubts. But the sort of "Russian faith" which he placed at the centre of The Brothers Karamazov was not the kind that could be attained by any reasoning. It required a leap of faith - a "commitment supported by nothing except devotion to the image and example of Christ".
There was no argument against the rationalists. But, like all great artists, Dostoevsky made his point by showing the effects of such ideas on the lives of his characters. Ivan's humanitarian rationality reduces him to despair and inner desolation; his abstract love for "humanity" masks contempt for human beings.
The ideas contained in Dostoevsky's novels are still among of the most powerful arguments against the West's ruling ideology of progressive rationalism. And to understand them one cannot do better than to read this marvellous book. It is one of the truly great literary biographies of our age.
Orlando Figes's new book, 'Natasha's Dance: A Cultural History of Russia', will published by Penguin/Allen Lane on October 3
